Introduction

This essay interpets Fichte's theoretical philosophy from his 1794 Foundation as a philosophy primarily concerned with the role that negation plays in judgement.  One of the basic tenets of Fichte's philosophy is that human judgement is a spontaneous act. A judgment has no cause outside itself; it is its own cause; it determines itself; etc.  According to this interpretation, Fichte is attempting to answer a challenge that inevitably arises once one assumes the premise of spontaneous judgement: assuming judgement to be spontaneous, how is it possible for empirical judgement to have any grip on empirical reality?  Judgements about empirical reality must, as such, be answerable to empirical reality.  I can judge, for example, that there is a tree outside my window, and it can turn out that I was mistaken - there is in fact no tree outside my window.  My judgement, in other words, is answerable to an objective standard, namely to the state of affairs in empirical reality.  However, if our judgements concerning empirical reality are themselves self-causing, self constraining, self-determining, etc., then how is it that empirical reality ever gets a grip on them?  Where, in our act of making an empirical judgement, do we allow empirical reality to weigh in on, or determine our judgement?

The picture that emerges in Fichte's theoretical philosophy as a response to this challenge can be summarized as follows:
-Empirical judgement has a grip on objective reality because every empirical judgement can err.
-The feature of empirical judgement that allows for it to err is negation. Any empirical judgement (and indeed judgement in general) can be described as either the affirmation or negation of a proposition.
-Affirmative and negative judgement are intimately connected.  We can say that negation that dwells within every affirmative judgement and thereby secures the falsifiability of our empirical judgements. In other words, falsifiability is immanent to every empirical judgement because negation is immanent to every assertoric proposition.
-The cognitive feature that tethers negation to all propositions such that negation dwells as an possibility within that proposition Fichte calls imagination (Einbildungskraft).

Equally important to understanding Fichte's theoretical philosophy is to understand what Fichte demarcates as not explained in his theory.
-The consciousness, or mind, is the source of judgement. Since these judgements don't have a mechanical origin, as would be the case, for example, if consciousness were determiend by efficient causes, there is no explanation for how empirical judgements arise. They simply do.
-Even though Fichte is out to show that empirical judgement is, by its very nature, negatable, he has no explanation for how, in actuality, incorrect empirical judgements are corrected. His theory ends with two irreconcible possibilities to explain this, an "idealist" and a "realist" position. The idealist position explains empirical judgement via a spontaneous and self-correcting capacity of mind that has a concept of false judgements and an ability to correct them. The realist position explains empirical judgement via an an external check (Anstoss) on, or resistence (Wiederstand) to, spontaneously generated false judgement that somehow induces, or causes, the mind to correct its false judgement.

The remainder of this essay consists in fleshing out this initial summary of Fichte's theoretical philosophical by going through key passages in his text.

Exegetical Note

In the Foundation of Theoretical Knowledge, Fichte only occasionally mentions judgements. Thus it might seem that viewing this text through such a lense must inevitably distort it. However, we believe that framing his investigation in terms of judgement and negation simplifies and concretizes a very complex and abstract investigation that otherwise remains beyond our grasp. As we will see, many of Fichfe's distictions and arguments begin to make sense when presented in our interpretive terms.

The Basic Setup

Fichte presents his theoretical philosophy as the unfolding of a single foundational principle:

```
Das Self posits itself as determined by the Non-Self.
```

We can make sense of this principle in the context of empirical judgements. According to this interpretation, the "Self" refers to the agent who judges, and the "Non-Self" refers to an empirical reality to which this agent's judgements are directed. To say that the Self posits itself as determined by the Non-Self is to say that our judgings take as their measure of correctness the state of affairs in the empirical world. But how are our judgements about empirical reality correctable if all judging springs from the Self? The determination that a judgement is correct or incorrect is itself a judgement, that would in turn require another judgement to determine its correctness, as so on ad infinitum. The self-sufficient nature of judging, what Fichte captures with his, admittedly broader and fuzzier concept of positing, seems to leave no room for determination 'from outside'.

And yet, as Fichte is noting in his foundational principle of theoretical knowledge, we take our judgements about empirical reality to be objective. Our judgements about reality are valid not because they come from us, but because they conform to reality.

In order to consider how it is possible for reality to weigh in on our judgements, Fichte introduces the concept of "interdetermination" or, as he calls it later, an "exchange of activity and suffering". This phenomenon is none other than the principle of non-contradiction in disguise. The principle of non-contradiction says that two contradictory principles cannot at the same time hold. In Fichte's terminology, the "reality" of Thing 1 implies the "negation" of Thing 2, and, visa versa, the "reality" of Thing 2 implies the "negation" of Thing 1.

Fichte calls this "interdetermination" because one can use the reality of one thing to determine the negation of another. Similarly, this is an "exchange of activity and suffering" because the "reality" or "activity" of one thing, "transfers over" or "exchanges" in the "negation" or "suffering" of that other thing.

Reality manifests its ability to determine our judgements when when we take our judgements to be false. In taking a judgement to be false, we have to give up the previous judgement that we first took to be true. This act of reliquishing our previous judgement for the negation of that judgement is dictated by the principle of non-contradiction, when doesn't permitt us to simultaneously hold to our old proposition p and our new proposition not-p, but rather compels us in accepting not-p to reject p.

In Fichte's terms, empirical reality, or the Not-Self, is the that which negates our propositions, and, in so doing, allows the true propositions to stand and the false onces to fall. Each and every time that a particular judgement of ours is show to be mistaken, the general rolea of the Self and Non-Self, the judging subject and the objective world are themselves exhibited writ large. The self makes a judgement p, and reality says whether or not it will stand.

This relationship between the particular negation of a judgement, on the one hand and, other the other, the general relationship of the judging subject to reality, explains why we see Fichte present his notion of "exchange" in different guises. In the beginning of the Theoretical Part, Section B, Fichte describes the exchange between the Self and the Not-Self as negating reality in the Self, in general, and not negating the reality of a specific judgement. ("So viele Teile der Negation das Ich in sich setyt, so viele Teile der Realitaet setzt es in das Nicht-Ich"). What does it mean to negate part of the reality of the Self? If we consider the Self as the totality of its judgements, then a negation of some of these judgements would be a the partial negation of the Self that Fichte is talking about. This general view of the Self, however, is replaced later on in Section E, when Fichte discusses the "exchange" as relating not to the judgings of the Self, in general, but rather specific judgements. At this later point in his investigtion, Fichte is still interested in the general case of the judging Self and the correcting Non-Self, but we introduces a new term, namely an "independent activity" of the Self and the Non-Self that grounds, or explains the particular case of a "Wechsel" or, as we are calling it, the negation of a particular judgement. In the following section we examine this distinction between the general and particular case of negation more closely, as well as two other distinctions Fichte makes concerning the case of negation.

Gradual Refinement

As we mentioned in the introduction, Fichte holds that we lack a complete explanation for empirical judgement, or theoretical knowledge, but can at least reduce our explanation to two irreconcilable positions. One position is idealist, explaining the correction of false empirical judgement through some version of a spontaneous capacity, while the other position is realist, explaining the correction of judgement through some kind of external determination. The majority of the Theoretical Part is concerned with outlining these two positions through a process of gradual refinement. In the process of gradual refinement, Fichte begins by trying to distinguish various idealist aspects of the process of negation from relatist aspects. Fichte calls this process of drawing these distinctions "analysis". Then, in a second process that he calls "sythesis", Fichte plays the distinctions between the idealist and realist aspects of negation off against one another. In working out how these positions contradict one another and searching for their reconciliation, Fichte moves gradually from a position where idealism and realism are in complete opposition to one another, to one in which their differences are confined to a very specific moment of empirical negation, namely the moment in which the Self chooses the negation of the proposition over its affirmation.

Analysis

Fichte distinguishes three times between the idealist and realist aspects of negation, resulting in a total of what we can call six "categories" of negation. We can summarize them in the following table, before describing them in more detail:

|                                                                       | Idealist             | Realist   |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------- | --------- |
| Origin of negation (internal versus external)                         | Substance            | Causality |
| Scope of negation (negation in general versus a particular negation ) | Independent Activity | Wechsel   |
| Abstraction level of negation                                         | Form                 | Matter    |

Substance and Causality

The categories of substance and causality concern whether or not we see negation as arising from inside or outside the Self. In the case of substance, the Self is viewed as containing, or being the agent of all of its judgements, including those judgements that are negated, or correct by empirical reality. In Fichtes words:

```
Substance is all exchange conceived of generally: an accident is something particular that exchanges with another exchanging thing.
There is originally only one substance, the Self.
```

According to our interpretation, we are taking "exchange" to refer to the negation of a judgement. Fichte is saying here that any and all judgements are judgements that the Self makes. Since all judgements are capable of "exchange" i.e. negation, it follows that the Self is the source of all judgements including negative judgements. This is clearly an "idealist" position because it locates the source of all judgement in the Self.

In the case of causality, the negation of a judgement is seen as arising through a process of the Self being "affected". In such a case, there is a causal relationship between something external, an external reality, that is impigning on and determining the Self to correct its judgement from p to Not-p. In Fichte's words "The Not-Self has...for the Self reality only insofar as the Self is affected...". This is a "realist" position because it attributes theoretical knowledge to a process of external determination, whereby the Self's judgements are corrected through a causal mechanism of external determination.

Independent Activity and Exchange

We have already indicated that "exchange", which Fichte uses as short hand for "an exchange of activity and suffering", refers to the negation of a judgement, whereby the "activity" of the judgement is negated, i.e. the judgements "suffers" its negation. Such a negation always happens in the context of a Self, which is doing the judging, and a Not-Self, which, through its capacity to negate judgements, enforces the notion of a reality independent of the Self and independent of what the Self might in any moment want or take to be the case. This context for negation makes clear that the Self and the Non-Self endure beyond the particular moment of negation. In contrast, a particular judgement and its negation can be fleeting - either a judgement stands, or it is eliminated. It is this enduring quality of the Self and Not-Self that prompts Fichte to refer to the overall context of negation as "independent activity". The totality of the Self's judgements endure even when one judgement is negated, and thus this general activity of judging is "independent" from any particular judgement. And something similar holds for the Not-Self: even if empirical reality is not currently, at this moment, correcting a misjudgement, it always remains present as that principle that ensures the objective reality of the Self's empirical judgement. Without this general notion of an external corrective, the Self could not be said to have any theoretical knowledge at all, but rather unchecked judgements projected onto a facade of reality.

Fichte characterizes the mere act of "exchange" as a realist position, because the explanation for the negation of this or that judgement is that reality is, in some way, enforcing its truth on the Self's mistaken view. It is more difficult to understand why "independent activity" is an idealist postion. "Independent activity", or, as we are referring to it, the contextual frame of negation, seems to have a both an idealist element, which is the judging activity of the Self, and a realist element, which is the correcting power of the Not-Self. As we will see below, Fichte does separate out these two moments. However, concieved of in their unity, Fichte nevertheless considers the contextual frame of negation to be an idealist position. We can account for this by the fact that although the Not-Self's capacity to negate a judgement is a realist phenomenon, it is the Self, and not the Not-Self, which must nevertheless register this correction, which is to say, make the corrective judgement and thereby grant the Not-Self a say in judgement.  Judgement, in general, is a held together by the Self who makes the judgements.

Form and Matter

The distinction that Fichte draws between from and matter can appear very slippery upon close reading of the text. Our interpretation of the Theoretical Part as a text about negation, however, allows us to simplify this distinction as one between negation as a formal operation on the one hand, and a meaningful operation on the other. Looked at as a formal operation, a proposition is negated through the addition of a negating particle, such as the addition of "Not" to "p" to yet "Not-p". According to this formal view, any and every proposition of the form "p" can be negated through the mere addition of a the particle of negation. Because this formal operation of negation is a operation of judgment, it is executed by the Self who judges and is therefore idealist. In contrast, the matter of negation is that which determines the meaning of a judgement and its negation, and therefore determines whether or not the negation accords with reality. The material aspect of negation is realist because it is the reference to the way things really are, to the empirical reality that makes judgements true or false.

Fichte's six categories in action

The final distinctions that Fichte draws in his process of analysis are not the six categories outlined above, but rather specific combinations of these six categories, as illustrated in this diagram.  
[Diagram]
Fichte works very methodically to combine each category from one type of distinction with two other categories from the two other types of distinctions. Thus, for example, he isolates how the form of negation functions within contextual frame of causal negation, and distinguishes this from the matter of negation within the contextual frame of causal negation. As the diagram makes clear, Fichte is exhaustive in his combinatoric logic; he dutifully walks through every single possible combination. For the purposes of expposition, we summarize his characterizations of each of these aspects along with how we understand it through our interpretation frame of negation:

-Form, the contextual frame of negation, causal negation:
-"a transfer, a positing through a not-positing".
-The Self transfers authority for the correctness of its judgements over to the world. By ackowledging its judgement to be incorrect, the Self acknowledges not itself, but rather emprical reality as the standard of correctness. It negates its own judgement (this negation of judgement is the "not-positing") and attributes the correctness of negating this judgement to the state of affairs in the real world (i.e. "positing reality in the Not-Self).
-Matter, the contextual frame of negation, causal negation:
-"a independent activity of the Not-I".
-The Self's judgement is negated by virtue of a the sate of affairs in reality.  In other worlds, the external reality of the world directly causes the negation of judgement within the Self.
-Form, single act of negation, causal negation:
  -"the mere mutual enmeshment of the exchanging parts", "a coming to be by means of ceasing to be"
  -According to Fichte's notion of causal negation, the judgement p and its negation Not-p are seen as two separate judgements (here the "alternating parts") that nevertheless repel one another so that one of the judgements holding means that the other cannot hold.  The formal operation of negating p to form  "Not-p" introduces a new judgement, namely "Not-P", which, in coming to being, necessarily means that p ceases to be.  
-Matter, single act of negation, causal negation:
 -"that in both parts which makes it so that both parts can and must be enmeshed in one another", "being in their essence contrary".
 -Matter refers to the state of affairs to which judgements refer. The matter of negation within the theory of causal negation says that two states of affairs negate one another if they cannot both hold, which is another way of saying that the two states of affairs are "in the essense contrary" to one another.   
-Form, the contextual frame of negation, substantial negation:
    -"excluding [something] from a determined, fulfilled, and in this respect total sphere." "With this action now, that which is excluded is not placed within a particular sphere; it's sphere contains therefore absolutely no other predicate than a negative one; it is 'not this sphere'" 
    -The Self viewed as a substance is, in this investigation, the totality of all its judgements concerning empirical reality.  When the Self negates a judgement, it does not learn anything new about this empirical reality, it merely learns that that which it had previously taken to hold true, namely p, is not the case.  Empirical reality becomes here the great unknown.  It is that realm which says whether or not our judgements hold. When a judgement is negated, i.e. when we judge Not-p, instead of p, we have not learned anything beyond the fact that our judgement p is false.  Empirical reality plays here a merely negative role in negating our judgement.
-Matter, the contextual frame of negation, substantial negation:
    -"a higher sphere which contains both the determined and the undetermined sphere"
    -The "higher sphere" to which Fichte refers here is the empirical reality about which one judges. When the Self makes a judgement, that judgement belongs to the "determined" sphere. When the Self suspends that judgment, i.e. is undecided about whether p or Not-p holds, that suspended judgement belongs to the "undetermined sphere".  For the Self, empirical reality is both determined and undetermined.  It is determined in the sense that certain things hold. It is undetermined in the sense that certain things that the Self had taken to be true, or could be true, might not, in fact, hold. Empirical reality remains empirical reality throughout the Self's process of judgeing p, considering whether p or Not-p, and then judging Not-p.
-Form, single act of negation, substantial negation:
    -"mutual exclusion of the exchanging  parts from the absolute totality"
    -In contrast to the form of causal negation, a judgement "Not-p" does not cause "p" to cease to be, but merely 'excludes' it from the sphere of judgements one is holding.  This sphere of judgements one holds to be true about a particular substance Fichte calls "absolute totality".  Since Fichte eventually rejects the idea that there are any substances in empirical reality, we can simply describe this "absolute totality" as judgements one makes.  When Not-p replaces p as the judgement one is making, the judgement p still exists in some sense in the realm of possible judgements, though it is nevertheless not held to be true.  The same applies visa versa to p replacing Not-p.  Not-p still exists as a possible judgement, even if it is replaced by p.
-Matter, single act of negation, substantial negation:
    -"the determinability of totality"
    -"Totality" refers here to the set of judgements one holds; "determinability" references to ability for these judgements to change. The "matter" of substantial negation is empirical reality concieved of as that to which the judgements we hold refers.  Empirical reality stays the same as a point of reference, even as the Self makes and corrects its judgements concerning what is the case in this empirical reality.  Fichte distinguishes here between two different moments in the process of judging, first "the absolutely posited and determined totality" of a substance and, second, the "determinable totality arising from the determined totality and that which has been excluded."  The first moment is a judgment one makes, say p.  It is "absolutely posited" because Fichte thinks that judgement is spontaneous, and it is "determined" because it is a completed judgement.  The second moment is a moment of suspended judgement, in which it is undecided whether p or Not-p applies.  This second moment includes both the judgement one has made, p, and the judgement one has thereby excluded, Not-p (Fichte uses the example of two different judgements that exclude one another, namely rest and motion, but it is easier to think in terms of simple negation).  Even though one makes a judgement p, one holds open, in making that judgement, that p could be false, meaning that Not-p holds.  Indeed, the judgement p contains within itself the possibility of Not-p. One can always suspend the judgement p so that either p or Not-p is the case.  The operation of negation is always at hand for the judging Self, without any further determination of empirical reality.  Fichte wants to mark out here that when a judgement is suspended, the thing to which the judgement refers does not cease to be, but rather remains that which is waiting for determination.  The "totality" of a substance in emprical reality (Fichte's example of a substance is a piece of iron, even though he will rather explain that there are not substances in empirical reality, only accidences, and that corresponds to our notion of discrete judgements), i.e. the set of judgements that can apply to it, is "determinable" .  The thing one is judging can contain p as well as Not-p, and, regardless of whether p or Not-p holds, maintains its status as the thing that a subject is trying to determine.  Once Fichte, in the course of his investigation, rejects the idea of substances existing in empirical reality, the matter of substantial negation becomes not this or that object in empirical reality, but empirical reality in general. 

Synthesis

Now that we have outlined the elements of analysis, we are in a position to understand Fichte's process of synthesis. Similar to how one might try to undestand how a watch works by taking it apart and putting it back together, Fichte, after having made his many distinctions between the aspects of negation in the analysis section, seeks in the synthesis section to describe how all of these parts work in tandem. As we can see from the our discussion of Fichte's analysis, the various parts of corrected, or negated judgement, fall into one of two groups: they are either idealist or realist. The unsurmountable difficulty in figuring out how the parts of negated judgement fit together is that idealism and realism do not fit neatly together in a theory of judgement; they are inherently at odds with one another. And yet, according to Fichte, theoretical knowledge would not be possible if there was not both an idealist and a realist dynamic at work. In order to consider how the idealist and realist dynamics can both be equally active in the act of negated judgement, Fichte first considers the two senarios in which they are not equally active. In the first scenario, the idealist dynamic is the prime mover, and the realist dynamic is only an illusory effect of the idealist dynamic. In the second scenario, the opposite is the case: the realist dynamic is the actual dynamic that creates the appearance of an idealist dynamic. After considering these two possibilities, Fichte then outlines the third possbility in which both the idealist and realist dynamic are equally involved in the process of negated judgement, and in fact, work together in some way to allow for the objectivity of empirical judgement.

With each synthesis, Fichte approaches his final account of theoretical knowledge. On the idealist side, Fichte gradually revises the account from an account in which the Self's judgements are simply sponteanous acts dictated by opaque internal principles free of any external control, to one in which judgements are shown to have, in their very structure, a mechanism for self-correction that at least prepares them for correction to external feedback.  The structure within judgement that allows for self-correction is the negation that dwells within a judgement. On the realism side, Fichte gradually revises the account from a fully deterministic account in which all judgement is part of a chain of efficient causality, to an account in which external determination is limited to some minimal 'resistance', or 'check', that induces the Self to correct its judgement by itself, which is to say, flip the sign of the proposition p to Not-p.

Before discussing various idealist and realist positions, let's first outline when and how they arise:

[the chart]

We can make a few observations about Fichte's methodology here that help us get to the meat of his argument.  First, Fichte always wants to move to a "critical idealism".  This is an idealism which both does justice to both idealism and realism.  It does justice to idealism by attributing judgement at least partially to the spontaneity of the Self, and it does justice to realism by allowing for some outside influence on the Self.
Second, Fichte gradually progresses the various idealisms, realisms, and critical idealisms from what he calls a "dogmatic" or "qualitative" position to a "quantitative" or "more abstract" version.  In the final three positions that Fichte considers, which occur in the synthesis of the contextual frame of substantial negation with the single act of substantial negation, Fichte more or less abandones this terminology, but it is clear from the context that these positions represent the "most abstract" forms of idealism, realism, and critical idealism.  The critical idealism at the very end is the theory of judgement that Fichte subscribes to.
Third, we observe that no theories of idealism or realism are espoused in the syntheses of single acts of negation.  This makes sense because a single act of negation does have in view the Self and empirical reality writ large.  Its scope is too small.  Only the contextual frames of these single acts of negation can advance theories of idealism or realism.   These syntheses, are, however the fulcrum of Fichte's process of synthesis.  In both the synthesis of the act of causal negation and the synthesis of the act of substantial negation, Fichte argues that negation is an operation that can be applied to any and all judgements.  No judgement about empirical reality is free from negation.  This insight is then used advance the previous idealisms and realisms from a more dogmatic to a more abstract position.

The syntheses of single acts of negation

Let us begin to understand Fichte's process of synthesis by starting with the single acts of negation.  These two syntheses, one for causal negation, the other for substantial negation, have the advantage of being relatively concrete in their findings.  They also have very similar findings that allow for the difference between causal and substantial negation to stand out in relief.  Both syntheses come to the conclusion that there is not a single judgement in empirical reality that is not capable of being negated.  The synthesis of substantial negation goes a step further in arguing that any judgement carries its negation within itself.  In contrast, the synthesis of causal negation sees a judgement and its negation as two separate but connected entities.

Fichte concludes in the synthesis of causal negation that all of our claims about what is the case, i.e. all of our judgements, are fallable.  At the same time, this does not mean that our judgements are merely illusions of what is the case. On the contrary, our judgements, even when it turns out they were wrong, emphatically assert that things in empirical reality are thus and so.  We can call this the ontological claim of judgement - it makes an assertion about what really is, and not just what we think is the case.  Fichte describes this tension between the fallibility of jdugement and its ontological claim thusly:

```One must deny the possibility of detaching Being in itself from Being in flux: both exchanging parts are posited as exchanging parts and are not posited at all outside of the exchange. - Being opposed in a real sense allows one to deduce the positing of the opposition, or being opposed in an ideal sense, and visa versa: real opposition and ideal opposition are one and the same.
```
Judgements are "ideal" in the sense that a judgement is a cognitive act.  At the same time, they make the claim to asserting what is out there in the "real" world.  When we negate a judgement, when we change our judgment from p to Not-p, we have thereby not only engaged in the formal operation of negating the proposition, but also made a new claim about what (doesn't) exist in empirical reality.  These are the two components of the "form" and "matter" that Fichte outlines in his process of analysis.  Another way to say this is that the formal operation of negation has material consequences - it changes our understanding of what is the case.  This is why Fichte says that "one must deny the possibilty of detaching Being in itself fromBeing in flux."  Our judgements about reality are all we have to understand reality, and therefore, when we negated our judgement about reality, reality itself changes for us.  Similarly, we can express this tension in the opposite direction: if reality is different from how we have judged it, this has consequences for the formal operation of negation. We are, namely, compelled  to rescind, or negate, our judgement.  No judgement of empirical reality is infallible, and this means that our understanding of reality is open to permannent flux.

In the synthesis of substantial negation, Fichte comes to a near identical conclusion: "one cannot think of anything that is fixed in the substance, rather one can only think of merely exchange."  Fichte works in this synthesis to demonstrate that there is no such thing as the essential properties of a substance.  Anything one predicates of a substance can turn out not to be true, so that all predications one makes are about 'accidental' features.  A further consequence of this conclusion is that there are no such things as discrete substances in empirical reality, since once one does away with the concept of essential features, the notion of a substance itself becomes superfluous.  Fichte expresses this consequence as follows: "after a complete analysis of substance, there is nothing left but the accidents.   A lasting substrate, some sort of carrier of the accidents is inconceivable; any accident you choose is always its own carrier and the carrier of its opposite, without needing a special carrier."   The refutation of the notion of "a lasting substrate" is a nearly identical point to the synthesis of causal negation, which said that the only kind of Being is Being-in-flux.  The only things that can be said to exist are "accidents", or in the terms of theoretical knowledge, judgements about what is the case, and these accidents are fallible - they can turn out not to be the case.

There is also an additional point in the synthesis of substantial negation that goes one step further than the synthesis of causal negation, namely that a positive judgement of the form p, also contains, or, in the words of Fichte, is the 'carrier', of its opposite.  In the case of causal negation, p and Not-p are closely related because they mutually exclude one another - they cannot both hold - and because one can get from p to Not-p through a merely formal operation of negation.  The case of substantial negation argues for a much closer relation, one could even say a unity, between p and Not-p.  This unity is indicated in Fichte's formulation that an accident is "its own carrier and the carrier of its opposite".  P already 'carries', or contains Not-p, and visa versa.  We could say that p and Not-p are identical in their content, but differ in their attitude to this content (footnote Kimhi's idea here of the syncategoremic).

In his discussion of substantial negation, Fichte has two terms that capture this notion of the unity of p and Not-p, namely "determinability" and "imagination."  In our summary of Fichte's process of analysis, we already saw how he conceives of "determinability."  "Determinability" is the state where both "p" and "Not-p" can hold.  It is made possible by a state of mind in which judgement is suspended. When we make a judgment such as "p", we have "determined" reality.  We can, however, also hold that judgement in a state of suspension, as for example, happens when we are in the process of revising our judgement.  We thought "p", but we are now unsure, and then we finally settle on "Not-p". In this moment of not being sure, the judgements "p" and "Not-p" belong to the "determinable sphere".  In this state of suspension, these judgements appear the same - both concern p, and since we are not decided between the affirmation or denial of p, "p" and "Not-p" meld into a state of what we could call "suspended-p."  Fichte calls the capacity that suspends judgement the "imagination", describing it at one point as follows: "This capacity, which is almost always underappreciated, is what ties together in a unity permanent opposites, what comes between two moments that would mutually abolish one another and, in this way, retains both."  Fichte's examples of opposites being held together at times seem to be more complicated that mere negation, for the examples he gives are "light" and "darkness" and "motion" and "rest".  However, he at one point glosses "rest" as "Not-movement", indicating that we can make sense of these opposites in terms of negation.  By couching Fichte's argument here in terms of the negation of a simple proposition p, as opposed to two completing propositions p and q, we can better make sense of "unity" of opposites.  The unity of 'p' and 'Not-p', that which they have in common is the content of p, that which remains when we suspend our judgement as to whether or not p is the case.

The syntheses of theoretical knowledge

Armed with the results with syntheses of single acts of negation, we are now in a position to understand how Fichte advances from "dogmatic", or "qualitative" positions of idealism and realism to more "abstract" or "quantitative" positions.  In the dogmatic view of idealism, the Self's empirical judgements are not all fallible, and in the dogmatic view of realism, empirical reality gets its contours from a self-standing entity that Fichte calls the Not-Self.  The abstract or quantitative views then work to incorporate the insight gleaned from the syntheses of single negation that all propositions are negatable.  In the quantitative view of idealism, all of the Self's judgements have the potential to be negated, and in the quantitative view of realism, the Not-Self becomes merely that which negates the Self's incorrect judgements.  Fichte uses the term "quantitative" to indicate that the Self's judgements are not absolutely true, but rather only true to the degree that they are not negated by the Not-Self.  The Not-Self, through the process of negation, determines the 'quantity' of the Self's judgements that do in fact hold.  In the quantitative views, empirical reality manifests out of the interplay of a Self that makes fallible judgements, and a Not-Self that then actually fells these judgements.  The Not-Self, or reality, only reveals itself to the Self through the act of negation, and that which the Self perceives as empirical reality are the sum total of its fallible judgements that, as yet, still hold. Then, in the final Fichtean view, Fichte brings to bear the insight from the synthesis of substantial negation that a positive judgement already carries within it its negation. On this final view, the Not-Self does not have to supply any content when it negates the Self's incorrect judgements.  Rather, the Self somehow registers a "check" or "resistance" to its judgement "p" and readily flips judgement to "Not-p".  In this final step from a quantitative to the fully Fichtean view, the Not-Self has dwindled from a supplier of negative propositions to a force that instigates in the Self a process of negation.

The dogmatic views

The dogmatic idealism and dogmatic realism are presented in the synthesis of the contextual frame of causal negation.  In the contextual frame of causal negation, the Self corrects its judgement, thereby transfering authority to the Not-Self, or empirical reality, as the measure of correctness.  As we saw above, Fichte breaks this dynamic into two parts, one idealist and realist.  The idealist part describes this transference of authority to the Not-I as a formal operation in which the Self negates its judgement p, and corrects it to Not-p. The realist part ascribes the negation of judgement to the state of affairs in the world, the "matter" of the judgement, which in some way compels the Self to correct its judgement.  Both of these dynamics are at play, and the dogmatic positions arise when one asserts that one dynamic is the underlying cause of the other.  Thus dogmatic idealism holds that, in fact, the state of affairs in the world is completely determined by whether or not the Self negates itself judgement.  Fichte offers Leibniz's concept of a "preestablished harmony", invoking a conception of the Self as a monad whose judgements, or perceptions, of the world are an entirely self-enclosed system.  For the opposite case, dogmatic realism, the state of affairs in the world fully determine the judgements the Self makes, and thus also whether or not the Self corrects its judgements.  Fichte's example here is "materialist Spinozism", a philosophical position that Jacobi attributed to Spinoza (footnote: also an unfair attribution), which says among other things, that our thoughts are determined by the interactions of matter.  Dogmatic realism also surfaces in the synthesis of the contextual frame of substantial negation, and for the same reason.  There, the "matter" also refers to the state of affairs in the world, and even though the form of negation there looks slightly different, saying that matter determines the Self's act of negation is enough to produce a dogmatic realism. There, Fichte glosses dogmatic realism as rejecting the spontaneity of judgements: "The Self is, in this line of argumentation, a representing being that must conform to the state of things."

The quantitative views

Quantitative realism in general distinguishes itself from qualitative realism in how it views the reality that guides, corrects, or determines the Self's judgement.  In the dogmatic theory, reality is a self-standing entity, more or less equavilent to the empirical reality we can observe, and  this reality is what creates, through means of material, efficient causality, the Self's judgements.  In the quantitative view, reality is not something the Self can directly observe, but only something which the Self can indirectly observe through the role it plays it determining its judgements: "The qualitative realist asserts the reality, independent of the Self, of <i>something that determines</i>; the quanitative realist asserts the mere reality, independent of the Self, of a <i>determination</i>".  That only way that reality "determines" the Self is through negating its judgements. This, for example, is how we can best understand the following passage in which Fichte's characterizes the synthesis of dogmatic realism and idealism in the synthesis of the contextual frame of causal negation.  In this passage Fichte describes this synthesis as "critical idealism", but later equates it to quantiative realism:
```
a) The Self does not posit something inside of itself, i.e. it posits that same thing in the Not-Self. b) That which is thus posited in the Not-Self is precisely that which does <i>not</> posit, or negates, the thing that was not posited in the Self.  The action turns circles back to itself; the Self is itself the Not-Self insofar as it is <i>not</i> supposed to posit something inside itself.
```
As this passage suggests, the Not-Self only gets its contours through negation.  When the Self makes a judgement that is negated, then it knows that this judgement does not concern something he himself has power over, but rather refers to external states of affairs, i.e. an external reality.  The Self only knows this external reality negatively - it is that which negates all of its incorrect judgements.  This is what Fichte means what he says "the Self is itself the Not-Self insofar as it is <i>not</i> supposed to posit something inside itself.'  The Self makes a judgement - this would be 'positing something inside itself', and melds, or conforms to the shape of the Not-Self, by negating an incorrect judgement, by recognizing that it is not supposed to make that judgement.

Quantitative idealism is the doctrine that all the Self's empirical judgements are negatable, and that the source of negation lies in the Self.  As in dogmatic idealism, there is no space in the theory for external restraint.  Negation is an act that the Self undertakes.  However, in contrast to dogmatic idealism, every single empirical judgement is qua empirical judgement made with an eye to its fallibility.  In dogmatic idealism, namely, empirical judgements can be negated, but in the first instance they are considered simply to be the case, and when the Self changes these judgements, that does not in principle throw into doubt any of the other judgements.  In Fichte's terms, qualitative idealism "negates something that has been posited by itself", whereas quantitative idealism "posits originally a limited quantity".  Or, in other terms, in qualitative idealism "an activity which has been posited by itself was negated by the natur and essense of the Self", whereas in quantitative idealism: "there is no activity in the Self that is negated: the mediate activity is there, and there should not at all exist an immediate activity."  These formulations of "limited quantity" and "mediate activity" point to empirical judgement as an act that is inheritely limited, fallible, open to correction, etc...


There are several paths to the quantitative views of idealism and realism, and all of them involve recognizing the ubiquitous role that negation plays in judgement.


The first account of quantitative realism occurs when syntheses the two opposing views of dogmatic idealism and dogmatic realism .  When Fichte presents this view, he calls it "critical idealism", but later says that this critical idealism is also a quantitative realism.  









The Fichtean views


Closing Remarks: The Anstoss that comes before the judgement
